Good afternoon. I'm Dr. Liu Wei, and this is Ethics in Artificial Intelligence, CS490.
AI ethics is not soft philosophy — it's an engineering discipline with real-world consequences.
Every design decision encodes values. The question is whether those values are made explicit.
Let's start with bias. Machine learning models learn patterns from historical data.
If that data reflects historical discrimination, the model will reproduce and amplify it.
Amazon's hiring algorithm, trained on past resumes, systematically downgraded women's applications.
COMPAS, used to predict recidivism in US courts, showed racial bias in its risk scores.
These are not edge cases — they are predictable outcomes of training on biased human data.
Fairness is not a single metric — there are over 20 mathematical definitions, many incompatible.
Demographic parity requires equal positive prediction rates across groups. Simple but often misleading.
Equalized odds requires equal true positive and false positive rates — a stronger guarantee.
Calibration requires that predicted probabilities match actual outcomes across groups.
It has been proven mathematically that you cannot satisfy all three definitions simultaneously.
Choosing which fairness criterion to optimize is a value judgment, not a technical decision.
Transparency and explainability are often confused. Transparency means open access to the model.
Explainability means the ability to understand why a specific decision was made.
GDPR's right to explanation creates legal requirements for explainability in automated decisions.
LIME and SHAP are post-hoc methods that approximate local explanations for black-box models.
But these approximations can be manipulated — an adversary can game them to produce misleading explanations.
Privacy is another critical dimension. Models can memorize training data and leak it.
Membership inference attacks can determine whether a specific person was in the training set.
Differential privacy adds calibrated noise to training to provide formal privacy guarantees.
The privacy-utility tradeoff is real — more privacy typically means worse model performance.
Autonomy and human oversight are increasingly important as AI systems make high-stakes decisions.
The EU AI Act classifies AI systems by risk level and mandates human oversight for high-risk uses.
For your essay this week: pick one real-world AI system and analyze it through two fairness lenses.
Argue which lens is most appropriate given the context, and justify your choice.